---
layout:     default
title:      DM More
created_at: 2008-08-30 19:16:25.492127 +01:00
---

{{ page.title }}
================

DataMapper is intended to have a lean and minimalistic core, which provides the
minimum necessary features for an ORM. It's also designed to be easily
extensible, so that everything you want in an ORM can be added in with a minimum
of fuss. It does this through plugins, which provide everything from
automatically updated timestamps to factories for generating DataMapper
resources. The biggest collection of these plugins is in dm-more, which isn't to
say that there's anything wrong with plugins which aren't included in dm-more --
it will never house all the possible plugins.

This page gives an overview of the plugins available in dm-more, loosely
categorized by what type of plugin they are.

Resource Plugins
----------------

These plugins modify the behavior of all resources in an application, adding new
functionality to them, or providing easier ways of doing things.

### [dm-validations](http://github.com/datamapper/dm-validations)

This provides validations for resources. The plugin both defines automatic
validations based on the properties specified and also allows assignment of
manual validations. It also supports contextual validation, allowing a resource
to be considered valid for some purposes but not others.

### [dm-timestamps](/datamapper-docs/docs/dm_more/timestamps.html)

This defines callbacks on the common timestamp properties, making them
auto-update when the models are created or updated. The targeted properties are
`:created_at` and `:updated_at` for DateTime properties and `:created_on` and
`:updated_on` for Date properties.

### [dm-aggregates](/datamapper-docs/docs/dm_more/dm-aggregates.html)

This provides methods for database calls to aggregate functions such as `count`,
`sum`, `avg`, `max` and `min`. These aggregate functions are added to both
collections and Models.

### [dm-types](/datamapper-docs/docs/dm_more/types.html)

This provides several more allowable property types. `Enum` and `Flag` allow a
field to take a few set values. `URI`, `FilePath`, `Regexp`, `EpochTime` and
`BCryptHash` save database representations of the classes, restoring them on
retrieval. `Csv`, `Json` and `Yaml` store data in the field in the serial
formats and de-serialize them on retrieval.

### [dm-serializer](http://github.com/datamapper/dm-serializer)

This provides '`to_*`' methods which take a resource and convert it to a serial
format to be restored later. Currently the plugin provides `to_xml`, `to_yaml`
and `to_json`

### [dm-constraints](http://github.com/datamapper/dm-constraints)

This plugin provides foreign key constrains on has n relationships for Postgres
and MySQL adapters.

### [dm-adjust](http://github.com/datamapper/dm-adjust)

This plugin allows properties on resources, collections and models to
incremented or decremented by a fixed amount.

is Plugins
----------

These plugins make new functionality available to models, which can be accessed
via the `is` method, for example `is :list`. These make the models behave in new
ways.

### [dm-is-list](http://github.com/datamapper/dm-is-list)

The model acts as an item on a list. It has a position, and there are methods
defined for moving it up or down the list based on this position. The position
can also be scoped, for example on a user id.

### [dm-is-tree](http://github.com/datamapper/dm-is-tree)

The model acts as a node of a tree. It gains methods for querying parents and
children as well as all the nodes of the current generation, the trail of
ancestors to the root node and the root node itself.

### [dm-is-nested_set](http://github.com/datamapper/dm-is-nested_set)

The model acts as an item in a 'nested set'. This might be used for some kind of
categorization system, or for threaded conversations on a forum. The advantage
this has over a tree is that is easy to fetch all the descendants or ancestors
of a particular set in one query, not just the next generation. Added to a
nested set is more complex under the hood, but the plugin takes care of this for
you.

### [dm-is-versioned](http://github.com/datamapper/dm-is-versioned)

The model is versioned. When it is updated, instead of the previous version
being lost in the mists of time, it is saved in a subsidiary table, so that it
can be restored later if needed.

### [dm-is-state_machine](http://github.com/datamapper/dm-is-state_machine)

The model acts as a state machine. Instead of a column being allowed to take any
value, it is used to track the state of the machine, which is updated through
events that cause transitions. For example, this might step a model through a
sign-up process, or some other complex task.

### [dm-is-remixable](http://github.com/datamapper/dm-is-remixable)

The model becomes 'remixable'. It can then be included (or remixed) in other
models, which defines a new table to hold the remixed model and can have other
properties or methods defined on it. It's something like class table inheritance
for relationships :)

Adapters
--------

These plugins provide new adapters for different storage schemes, allowing them
to be used to store resources, instead of the more conventional relational
database store.

### [dm-rest-adapter](http://github.com/datamapper/dm-rest-adapter)

An adapter for a XML based REST-backed storage scheme. All the usual DataMapper
operations are performed as HTTP GETs, POSTs, UPDATEs and DELETEs, operating on
the URIs of the resources.

Integration Plugins
-------------------

These plugins are designed to ease integration with other libraries, currently
just web frameworks.

### [merb_datamapper](http://github.com/merb/merb_datamapper)

Integration with the <a href="http://www.merbivore.com/">merb</a> web framework.
The plugin takes care of setting up the DataMapper connection when the framework
starts, provides several useful rake tasks as well as generators for Models,
ResourceControllers and Migrations.

### [rails_datamapper](http://github.com/datamapper/rails_datamapper)

Integration with <a href="http://rubyonrails.org/">Rails 2.x</a>. It provides a
Model generator and also takes care of connecting to the data-store through
DataMapper.

### [dm-rails](http://github.com/datamapper/dm-rails)

Integration with <a href="http://rubyonrails.org/">Rails 3.x</a>. It provides a
model and migration generators, takes care of connecting to the data-store through
DataMapper and supports <a href="http://github.com/rspec/rspec">RSpec2</a>.

Utility Plugins
---------------

These provide useful functionality, though are unlikely to be used by every
project or assist more with development than production use.

### [dm-sweatshop](http://github.com/datamapper/dm-sweatshop)

A model factory for DataMapper, supporting the creation of random models for
specing or to fill an application for development. Properties can be picked at
random or made to conform to a variety of regular expressions. dm-sweatshop also
understands has n relationships and can assign a random selection of child
models to a parent.

### [dm-migrations](http://github.com/datamapper/dm-migrations)

Migrations for DataMapper, allowing modification of the database schema with
more control than `auto_migrate!` and `auto_upgrade!`. Migrations can be written
to create, modify and drop tables and columns. In addition, the plugin provides
support for specing migrations and verifying they perform as intended.

### [dm-observer](http://github.com/datamapper/dm-observer)

This plugin eases operations involving models across multiple repositories,
allowing wrapping in a `repository(:foo)` block to be replaced with a
`MyModel(:foo).some_method` call.


Observers watch other classes, doing things when certain operations are
performed on the remote class. This can be anything, but they are commonly used
for writing logs or notifying via email or xmpp when a critical operation has
occurred.

### [dm-cli](http://github.com/datamapper/dm-cli)

The `dm` executable is a DataMapper optimized version of `irb`. It automatically
connects to a data-store based on the arguments passed to it and supports
easy loading of DataMapper plugins, models from a directory as well as reading
connection information from a YAML configuration file.

### [dm-ar-finders](http://github.com/datamapper/dm-ar-finders)


ActiveRecord style syntax for DataMapper. This includes functionality such as
`find_by_name`, `find_or_create` and `find_all_by_title`.
